Learning Android is a lot less intimidating when you are introduced to the basics.  Here are the basics I was taught recently.

## Sections
- [Getting Started](#getting-started)
- [Key Parts of Android](#key-parts-of-android)
- [Gradle Build System](#gradle-build-system)
- [Industry Tips](#industry-tips)
- [Learning Resources](#learning-resources)

## Getting Started
Starting to dive into unfamiliar tech can be overwhelming, luckily, there's really not that much prerequisite to getting started with Android.

### What you need
Personal opinion, you'll want to have a computer that is fairly powerful and has plenty of RAM to spare.  I've heard Android Studio can _potentially_ be a resource hog.

Actual Needs
- Download the latest version of [Android Studio](https://developer.android.com/studio)
- Android Device - Android Studio does provide you an _emulator_ if you don't have a physical device.

### Create a Project
Once you've got an updated copy of Android Studio you can create a project, which, actually sets up an entire "Hello World!" for you.
- Start up Android Studio
- Follow the prompts to create a new Project
    - For simplicity, start with a _Blank Activity_ (it's as basic as it gets)
    - In one section of the options you can choose either _java or kotlin_, I'm choosing kotlin.
    - With your first app, most of the options can, and should, be left at _defaults_.

After you've created your first project it might take _a few minutes_ to build as it sets up all the files.  Once your files are all generated see [Run Your App](https://developer.android.com/training/basics/firstapp/running-app) in Google's docs to get a device set up.

At this point you can hit the _play_ button in the IDE and it will _build, install, and launch_ your app on the emulator or physical device, whichever you have set up.

### File Structure
Once your project has built, you can finally take a peek at the file structure.  For me, it helps to at least be aware of what the folders are, even if I don't need to touch them yet.

In the left side of the IDE you'll see the files of your new project.  You'll also notice at the top above the files, it has a dropdown to select _different views_ of the project's files.
- _Project_: Shows the files as they are in the filesystem. (This view is good to know about, but less useful in my short time with it)
- _Android_: Shows a friendly view of the various folders which house different content. Note - it's NOT the actual folder structure of the files on disk, it's just organized in this way to be useful for developers.

I will be using the _Android_ view

Here are the essential folders to be aware of. I used most of these in my first tutorial app.
- _manifests_: Essential app details the OS needs to launch your app.
- _java_: All kotlin/java code to control your app goes here
- _java(generated)_: Files generated by the IDE, there's no need to modify these files
- _res_: Folders with resources you can use in your app
    - _drawable_: contains images/vectors
    - _layout_: contains xml files that describe screens of your app
    - _values_: contains strings, and other static values

## Key Parts of Android
In my first app, I learned that there are really 3 basic building blocks to get something working in an Android App.  There's the _xml layout_, the controlling _java/kotlin Activity code_, and optionally some _resources_ to reference, like strings.

### Layout (XML)
This is where you actually build the components that the user will see.  It's defined in XML, and there are many different components you can place into the layout.  I will introduce you to the 4 that I used in a very simple app.

Layout Elements
- LinearLayout
- Button
- TextView
- ImageView

### Activity (Kotlin)
An activity file is where you actually define the behavior of the app.  For example...
- You can define what happens when a button is clicked by the user.
- Should text appear at the bottom of the screen confirming to the user that something happened?
- Randomly generate a number, like a dice roll
- etc

### Resources (images/text)
I want to go over the two resources I used, images, and strings.

Images that you want to use in your app go in the _drawable_ folder.  Simply copy your images into the _res/drawable_ folder and then you can reference the image in your layout xml files.

```xml
<ImageView android:src="@drawable/yourimage" />
```

String Resource
```xml
<String .... />
```

## Gradle Build System

## Industry Tips
### Namespaces in Layouts
### Reduce Calls to findViewById
### Move Strings to Resource File
### View Binding

## Learning Resources
[Udacity Course - Developing Android Apps With Kotlin](https://classroom.udacity.com/courses/ud9012)
[Android Studio](https://developer.android.com/studio)





Notes on Android with Kotlin

## Getting started

What you need to start learning Android
- Android Studios

## Virtual or Real Device
Tools > AVD Manager.  When I installed Android Studio there was already a Virtual Device (Pixel 3) ready for me to use, convenient!
- Version of Android
- Device to Emulate

## Understanding Project Options
- Project - show files as they are on the filesystem
- Android - shows files in a way that's "helpful"

## Android Project View
- manifests - essential app details so an OS can launch the app, defines permissions
- java - all Kotlin code lives here
- java(generated) - files built by Android Studio, don't edit these
- res (resources) - static content to be used in the app
    - drawables (images)
- Gradle Scripts - Files used to build and run the app
## Resources
[Udacity Course - Developing Android Apps With Kotlin](https://classroom.udacity.com/courses/ud9012)

## Activies
- Draws user Iterface
- Declared in the manifest with correct <intent-filter>
    - <action... MAIN>
    - <category... LAUNCHER>
- Have associated layout.xml file
- Layout Inflation happens when an Activity is started

## View Groups
Help layout multiple elements
- LinearLayout - One after another, vertical or horizontal

## View Elements
TextView
- android:textSize="30sp" sp means "scale independent pixels"

## Strings
Move them out of your code
Android Studio will help you move them to _res/values/strings.xml_ if you click on the lightbulb in the editor.

## Layout Properties
All of these are preceded with _android:
- layout_width: the width of your element
- layout_height: the height of your element
- orientation: vertical | horizontal for LinearLayout
- layout_gravity: where the element should be positioned
- text: display text
- id: example... android:id="@+id/roll_button", notice the _@+/_ this help Android Studio generate the integer ID with the R class

Layout that need to have programmable reference need an _id_
- When you give an id to an element, the R (resource to view ids mapping) class generates a unique integer for it
- use findViewById(R.id.yourIdHere) to get reference to it

View Binding - Alternative to using findViewById in Android Studio 3.6+
- Get a reference to the full xml layout, and reference the id you need
- Type Safety, you don't have to guess what type a view element is
- Null Safety, you don't pass a resource number, so you can't guess wrong

Example of how
```kotlin
// Create a binding for activity_main.xml layout
binding = ActivityMainBinding.inflate(layoutInflater)

// reference the view with the id incredible_id
binding.incredibleId
```

## Adding Images
- Place Images into the drawables folder
- Drawables automatically get a generated id, access them with R.id.your_resource

## Other things used
Toast
Random (java util)
minimize calls to findViewById (helps prevent lag in more robust apps)

How to initialize NON NULL variables in Android.  A use of this is to get reference to a regularly referenced view element
- lateinit keyword

## Gradle
- Target devices
- Compile to executable code
- Dependency management
- App Signing for Google Play
- Automated Tests

Different files
- Modules
- Project

### Adding xCompat (backwards compatible code)
- add to app build.gradle
- use it in layout file
- add to namespace of layout